I want to read to you the words found in Paul's Epistle to the Romans in chapter 11, reading from the beginning of verse 23 to the end of verse 32, from verse 23 to 32 in the 11th chapter of the Epistle to the Romans.
And they also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be graphed in.
So God is able to graph them in again.
or if they were cut out of the olive tree which is wild by nature, and were grafted contrary to nature into a good olive tree, how much more shall these, which be the natural branches, be grafted into their own olive tree?
For I would not brethren that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits, that blindness in part is happened to Israel until
the fullness of the Gentiles become in.
And so all Israel shall be saved.
As it is written, there shall come out of Zion the deliverer, and shall turn away on godliness from Jacob.
For this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins.
As concerning the gospel, they are enemies for you as Sikhs.
But as touching the election, they are beloved for the Father's Sikhs.
for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.
For as he in times past have not believed God, yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief, even so have these also now not believed that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy.
For God earth concluded them all in unbelief that he might have mercy upon all.
Well, obviously,
I'm not proposing to deal with all that tonight.
But I have read those verses to you because they constitute a kind of subsection of this main section of this chapter that runs from verse 11 to the end of that thirty-second verse.
In other words, we are starting here tonight on a new subdivision or subsection of this
main division.
And it is, of course, the most important one.
It will be very difficult to find anywhere in the Scripture a greater amount of teaching packed into small compass than we have in the words that I've just been reading to you.
And as we shall see, they are of the greatest, possibly importance to us.
If we want to understand God's ways with respect to us, we want to understand the Church
and if we want to understand the future.
And as we look at all those, the main effect and result undoubtedly will be that we shall be strengthened in our faith, and we shall see whatever the difficulties and the obstacles that may be facing us at this moment, that in the sight of God and in the eyes of God, they are but as nothing.
God's great plan and purpose is certainly and surely
going to be carried out?"
Well, very well.
Here it is then I say it's the beginning of a new subsection.
And again, it seems to me to be very important that I should remind you of our analysis of this whole chapter.
Nowhere perhaps is the apostle reasoned and argued a case more closely than he does in this great chapter.
And the danger is, of course, that we miss the word because of the trees.
We've got to pay attention to details, and there is energy.
But we mustn't stop at the details.
We must keep on reminding ourselves of the whole picture.
Indeed, it is a part of my case to remind you again that you rarely will not be able to understand the details unless you do grasp the whole.
The whole is more important than the details.
But the two, of course, are of essential importance.
Now, the object of the chapter is to tell us that God does not finish with the view as a people, as a race, as a nation.
The appearances at that time strongly suggested that there they were the bulk of them outside the Christian Church.
And many had come to the conclusion and it was the peculiar temptation
that confronted the Gentiles to come to that conclusion that God had finished with his ancient people.
The whole object of the chapter is to refute that and to show that that is entirely wrong.
Now, there are two main sections in the statement.
The first section is from verse 1 to verse 10, where the apostle demonstrates that the rejection of Israel wasn't total.
It wasn't a total rejection.
Then from verse 11 to verse 32, he shows that it's not a final rejection.
It's only a temporary one.
Now, there are the two main sections and divisions.
But we are now engaged, you see, in the second main division, which starts at verse 11 and goes on to the end of verse 32.
Now, I must again remind you of what has been said, because each step leads to the next.
That's his logical method.
He builds up his case.
Remember, therefore, that he states the main proposition in verses 11 and 12.
I say that, have they stumbled that they should fall?
Is this a real final falling away?
His answer is, in the word stumbled, they haven't fallen, they won't be stumbled.
God forbid his
But rather through their fall, some vision has come unto the Gentiles for to provoke them, the Jews, to jealousy.
Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world and the diminishing of them, the riches of the Gentiles, how much more their fullness?
That's the case.
There he throws out this first hint that there is going to be a restoration, that the Jews as a bulk, as a race as it were, are going to believe the gospel and are going to come in.
Then you remember in verses 13 and 14 he has a little digression explaining why he is taking the trouble to say all this to the Gentiles.
He does so because he is the apostle to the Gentiles and he magnifies his office.
He wants them to understand these things.
Then in verse 15 he states his big case again, if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them be?
But life from the dead.
There's the great proposition.
Then, you see, he's got to establish this.
His grounds for saying that they are going to be received back again.
And in verse 16, he throws out an argument.
If the first root be holy, the lump is also holy.
If the root be holy, so are the branches.
That, you remember, was just this historical reference to the origin of this nation in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
the patriarchs and so on, and the argument that he based upon that level.
In verse 17, he has a digression again, the thing we've been considering recently, verse 17, verse 22, where again his great pastoral heart comes out, and his concern about these people is most prominent.
He delivers an exhortation to the Gentiles.
He wants to warn, he wants to safeguard them,
from certain terrible errors.
So he exhausts them to humility and gives his reason for doing so.
Very well.
But in verse 23, where we arrive at now, he goes back again to the main arguments.
He turned aside because he's a teacher, because he's a pastor, because he's a preacher.
He's developing a great argument, but he wants to be sure that they're with him and that he's killing them with him, so he applies it and then forces it and aligns the thing.
So typical of him.
But he comes back to the main theme, and that's what he takes up again then in verse 23.
And the theme is, once more, this restoration of the Jew.
this theme that he stated in verse 12 and repeated in verse 15.
Back he comes to it again.
Now he rarely is going to deal with it finally from here on.
And so he deals with this, as I say, until the end of the 32nd verse.
Now how do we approach this most important subsection of this great argument?
And it seems to me
and I'm more and more fascinated by this particular section.
There are many ways in which it can be treated, but I've come to the conclusion you may have your own way of doing it, but to me this is the way that appeals most of all.
There are two ways in which we can look at this and in which we can deal with it.
The first is, if you like, a mere kind of mechanical division, a mechanical division of the subsection.
We've adopted that method several times,
So far, and of course it is a very good one in many ways, it is the first that one should always use in exposition.
So let's try it like that.
And here are the divisions.
In verses 23 and 24 he shows the possibility and the reasonableness and indeed even the probability
of the restoration of the Jews as a nation.
The possibility of it, the reasonableness of it, and indeed the probability of it.
But then, from verse 25 to verse 22, he makes a tremendous difference where he speaks of not the probability nor the possibility, but the absolute certainty.
of the risk of vision of the Jews as an issue.
As he says, it's something that has been revealed to him.
So he makes one of his great prophetic utterances.
And as is his custom, he points out that though in a sense it is new and surprising, it actually isn't new.
It has been prophesied in the Old Testament.
He always cleanses.
everything he says by an old testament quotation, and here we will find that there are two main ones.
That's verses 25 to 27, where we are dealing now, not with possibilities and probabilities, but absolute certainty, a dogmatic pronouncement.
Then it's from here on, I find myself in some difficulty, and yet I think that on the whole this is the best way to put it.
That from verse 28,
to the end of verse 32, he rarely is just recapitulating what he has been saying all the way from verse 11.
It's a recapitulation of the old statement.
He does it in order to sum it up and in order to emphasize it and to underline it and bring out the great principle which governs everything, which is this
in verse 32 that God has concluded them all in unbelief that he might have mercy upon all.
So I think the best way of looking at 28 to 32 is to look at it as recapitulation.
There are other ways in which one could have subdivided that.
Perhaps when we come actually to deal with the portion, we shall do so.
But taking it as a whole, it is indeed a bit of recapitulation, reiteration.
He should not, and it all comes to this.
There's in a sense nothing new in those verses.
He stated it in different forms earlier on in the chapter.
Now, there's one way.
That's what I call a kind of mechanical division of the matter.
But there's a second way in which we can look at this.
And that is in terms of the way in which this subsection advances
The great argument that the apostle is deploying, and I'd rather like to think of it in this way.
Now, again, let us, for a moment, look at the wonderful way in which the great apostle handles his matter.
There's nothing in a way, in the whole of Scripture, that's more difficult than this chapter.
You've got to concentrate, you've got to use all your powers, you need
The aid of the early spirit, it's a most difficult matter.
People have often therefore neglected this chapter altogether.
They say, I don't know what he's talking about there.
All this argument backwards and forwards.
Well, the answer is that the apostle, if you take the trouble, you will find that he follows his argument along.
The difficulty partly arises because he always wants so much of a pastor and a preacher.
And of course, that means that he's a
a very great teacher.
The teacher doesn't merely state things.
He wants them to be grasped by the people.
So the apostle drives them home all along.
And therefore, there's a sense in which, having gone right through all the details, you stand back and you just watch the mounting argument.
Now let me try and do that for you.
Let me pick out the argument.
And we'll see the way the friend which he builds it up and ends on a great climate.
What he is setting out, I say, to do is to show that God is not finished with the jewels.
Now, then, your are his arguments, the first.
The first argument he's got to prove that God is not finished with the jewels is right away at the beginning of the chapter, when he says that he himself is a proof that that isn't so.
I myself also, when is the light of the seed of Abraham and the tribe of Benjamin.
And if he were the only one who would become a Christian, it would be enough.
You couldn't say that God had finished with the Jews when this man of all meant this prominent or possible himself was a Jew who had believed the gospel.
Their first argument.
Then the second argument was the argument concerning the remnant according to the election of grace.
That's argument number two.
You remember when we were doing this, I myself, but not only I, the rebels, a remnant,
according to the election of grace.
So there you see is a second argument.
Then the third argument is in verse 16.
That argument about the first fruit you remember, if the first fruit be holy, the lump is also holy.
Or as he puts it in the terms of root, if the root be holy, so are the branches.
You remember the argument was, and it would appeal to the Jews particularly,
that if this first root of the lamp that was offered was holy, well as it is representative of the whole, if the first root is holy, the whole must be.
And then the other illustration, the root and the branches.
The nature of the root will determine the nature of the branches.
In other words, the argument is because what was true of the fathers of Israel was true of them, well then certain things must be true of those who have come out of them.
So there is the third argument and it's a very powerful argument.
Now then, in this twenty-third verse he moves on to his fourth argument and his fourth argument is based upon the power of God.
God is able, that's argument number four, in this main argument.
Then in verse twenty-four we have his fifth main argument.
And the fifth main argument is this, that in the light of what God has already done in the case of the Gentiles, it is further proof that if he is not impossible for him to restore the Jews also.
He argues again from the greater to the lesser, how much more so, one of his favourite ways of argumentation.
But that's argument number five.
Now I hope you've got these, his own case
The remnant according to the election of grace, the argument about the very constitution of the nation of Israel, then number four, God's power and ability.
Fifthly, what God has already done in the case of the Gentiles proves his ability to do it also in the case of the Jews.
Then in verse 25, he's come to the end of argumentation, and now he just makes this tremendous
statement, this dogmatic prophetic pronouncement, which is going to put the thing beyond any doubt or question whatsoever.
There's no further answer.
God has made a revelation.
And having said that, all he has to do now is well to sum it all up, recapitulate, put it in brief compass.
This is what it amounts to therefore.
And then, as you know from verse 33 to the end,
Having looked at it all, he's himself so filled with amazement that he can butt burst out into great exclamation.
Oh, the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and the knowledge of God, and so on.
Well, now there is an analysis of this important and tremendous subsection.
Having done that, we can proceed to the exposition.
and look now at his particular states.
So we start with the 23rd verse.
And here I say that he is dealing with the possibility of the restoration of the jewels.
This is where we find this fourth argument of his.
And he explains it to us.
He says, they also, that's a reference as we shall see to the jewels.
You see, this links on with what he just said at the end of verse 22.
Behold, therefore, the goodness and severity of God.
On them which fell, there's the bulk of the Jews, severity.
But toward the goodness, if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise, thou also shall be cut off.
And they also back again to them.
If thou died not still in unbelief, shall be grafted.
for God is able to graph them in again.
Now here is an interesting and an important statement.
He says that there is a possibility with regard to the unbelieving Jews, but he says that is a condition with respect to this.
And it's most interesting to notice how he puts it.
They also, if,
they abide not still in unbelief.
Now, the apostle here is going to repeat and reassert his great principle with regard to the way of salvation or of entry into the Church, into the Kingdom of God.
What is it?
This is the thing that he's been hammering all along, and back he comes to it again.
What is this principle?
Well, negatively,
This is the thing he wants to say.
It isn't a question of nationality.
It isn't a question of works.
What is it then?
Well, it is always a matter of faith and it is a matter of belief.
If they abide not still in unbelief.
There's only one thing that admits anybody into the Kingdom of God and into the Church of God, and that is faith.
or putting it negatively, the only hindrance and obstacle is unbelief.
It's never a matter of nationality.
Now, the Jews have made that mistake.
The Gentiles were tempted to make the same mistake.
So he is reminded of him that they also must continue in this goodness in faith, in believing in this goodness and so on.
Otherwise, they also shall pick it off.
It's always a question of faith and of belief.
There is only one principle which God ever uses in his dealings with myth, and he's never used another.
It has always been faith from the very beginning.
There never will be any other way whatsoever.
Salvation is always by faith and by faith only.
This is this great cardinal doctrine of justification by faith only.
Now, it's interesting to notice that the apostle puts this negatively, not positively,
They also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be grafting.
Is there significance in this?
Well, I think there is, because again he is safeguarding a very important and a very vital drink.
This isn't the first time we've come across this point.
We've heard it many, many times, but the Apostle goes on repeating it and we therefore have to do the same thing.
In teaching his great doctrine of election, he is very careful always to assert at the same time, men's responsibility.
Now, we have to say that many times in doing chapter 9 and also in chapter 10, and we've had to say it several times already in this chapter.
I've put it like this each time.
That man is responsible for his damnation.
but he's never responsible for his selfish.
Now, you may say to me, how can you reconcile those?
It's not for us to reconcile them.
That is what is called an antinomy.
It is what is plainly taught in the scripture.
The doctrine of election must never be supposed to teach that men is not responsible.
Men is responsible.
And heavily, where we have seen so plainly and so clearly,
that if a man ends in damnation, it is his fault and his responsibility.
But it is equally clear that it is God who saves, and that no man saves himself.
That's why the apostle puts the negative here rather than the positive.
He doesn't say, you see, that they will be saved if they believe, because if he said that, many would say, ah, it's man's belief after all that saves him.
If a person doesn't put it like that, therefore he puts it like this.
He says, if they abide not still in unbelief, it's the negative.
And man's part is always the negative.
Interesting to notice that you see how that comes in once more.
This thing which we found so often, God is responsible for the salvation of every soul.
The lost are entirely responsible for their lost condition.
They are offered salvation, they deliberately reject it, and therefore they are responsible.
There are the two sides of this great doctrine that runs right through the whole Bible, election and responsibility.
Very well, in order to support that, notice, let's go on and notice what he says.
He doesn't say, you see, that they're able to graft themselves in again.
No, no.
It's God who is able to graph them in again.
They shall be graphed in.
You don't graph yourself into this olive tree.
That is something that men cannot do.
It's impossible with men.
In other words, the emphasis here, as I said in my analysis at the beginning, the real point of this verse is to emphasize God's power.
God is able to graph them in again.
Now, let's again get back into our minds, into our view, the position with which the apostle was daily, and of course, it's in a sense equally true today.
As you wonder, as Christian people look out upon the whole scene, we might very well come to the conclusion that the people who are in the most hopeless position as regards salvation are the Jew.
Because they are what they are, because of their background and everything, they seem to be in the most hopeless position of all.
And they were at this time, the Gentiles were tempted to come to the conclusion that nothing could ever be done, that God had finally cast them out, throwing them away.
Now the apostle says, it isn't so, because of God's power.
God is able to graph the mane again.
Now, the word translated angel is an interesting and an important word.
It carries in it a suggestion of great difficulty, that it's not an easy thing, and that's the whole point of this argument.
It's a very difficult thing, this, but God can do it.
That's what the apostles say.
Now, this is something that, of course, you find very often in the scriptures.
I read to you just now the portion out of the tent,
chapter of the gospel according to Saint Mark, because we have there a very graphic illustration of this very point.
You remember the rich young ruler coming to our Lord, such an excellent man, such a moral man, such a religious man, such a good man, and above all one who obviously admired our Lord and comes to him asking for help and for advice, but he goes away sorrowful.
And the apostles, you remember,
were taken aback at this.
They were astonished.
It repeated twice the second time, we are told that they were astonished beyond measure.
They were a male and they turned to our Lord and they said, who then can be saved?
They said, if this, if a man like this is outside,
And you say that it's easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for the rich men to go into the kingdom of God, who then can be saved the things impossible.
And you remember our Lord's reply in verse 27, with men it is impossible, but not with God.
For with God all things are possible.
That's the answer.
It's the only answer.
With men it is impossible.
but not with God.
That's the very thing we've got here.
The restoration of the Jews seems utterly impossible, and it's only possible in one way, and that is God is able to graph them in again, with men it is impossible, but not with God, for with God all things are possible.
In other words, the restoration of the Jews is possible for one reason only,
And that is that it is the miraculous action of God that's going to do it, nothing else.
Now, we've already told us that, but he's repeating it here again.
Nothing less or short of the power of God could possibly bring this to pass, but God is going to do it.
God is able to graph them in again.
This impossible thing is possible with God.
Now, I think you'll find that all the subsequent argumentation
right until the end of verse 32 is virtually saying just that.
That's why this first verse here is such an important one.
This is the first statement and he's going to work it out more and more.
This is the basis of everything.
God's power, God's ability.
Very well.
Now then in
Another point we must notice here in this same verse is this one.
And this is a negative point I'm making now.
But I think you'll see the significance of it and the importance of doing it.
This then that he talks about, they also, who are they?
And what about this word again?
They also, if they abide not still in unbelief,
shall be graphed in, for God is able to graph them, this them, this they and them, the same people, again.
Now, we've got to be careful about this.
Because on the surface you might come to the conclusion that the people who are to be graphed in again are the ones who've already been taken out.
In verse 17, if some of the branches be broken off,
Or again, as he puts it in the 22nd verse, we hold therefore the goodness and civility of God on them which fell severity.
You see, on verse 19, I will say, then the branches were broken off that I might be graphed in.
Well, then you say, he must be saying here in verse 23 that the branches which have been broken off are going to be put in again.
The very same branches that were broken off
are going to be graphed in again.
It looks like that on the surface, doesn't it?
But of course, it cannot possibly mean that, and for this reason.
It cannot mean it purely in terms of history.
Here was the apostle writing 1900 years ago, and more than that.
And he is telling them about something that is
going to happen.
It doesn't even happen yet.
So blatantly, he is not referring to the Jews who were alive in the first century and who had rejected our Lord and who were persecuting the apostle Paul and other Christians.
They are not the same people.
So that he is not saying that the very self-same persons who have been cut off are again going to be graphed in.
Now, what he means by the day and the then is the Jews regarded racially or nationally.
It can mean nothing else.
As I've been a pinch to point out to you all along, what the apostle is dealing with in this chapter is not individual salvation.
He is dealing here with the question of the bulk of the Jews.
Now, in earlier chapters he's been dealing with the individual.
But here he is dealing specifically with the Jews as a race, the bulk of the Jew.
And so when he talks about they and them, he is not referring to the contemporaries of himself and of our Lord who were outside, he is referring to the race of the Jews in some future time.
Why do I take the trouble to emphasize that particular point?
Well, my reason for doing so is this.
But if you read this verse superficially, you might very well come to this kind of conclusion.
You would say the apostle is there teaching quite plainly that there is such a thing as falling away from grace.
He said that here was a man who once was in the church because of sin and unbelief.
He's taken out of the church.
He's torn off.
He's outside.
But he can come back again.
Now there are people who teach that kind of thing.
They preach a falling away from grace and then a restoration.
There is a type of superficial evangelism and teaching which almost gives this impression that a man can take a decision, he can become a Christian, he can receive life from God, then he can lose it by sending.
Then if he repents, he can get it back again so that you're
Not born again, you are then born again, you are again not born again, and again you can be born, craft him in again.
So you can go in and out to the all-entry.
Now that's a very common teaching today.
It's a very superficial teaching, I say, because it is something that is just impossible.
That's why it's so important.
We should have an exact and the correct interpretation of what the apostle is saying in this verse.
The they and the them are not the same people who may as referred to as already cast out, not the same individuals.
It is a reference only to the Jews as a race.
At this time the Jews as a race were outside.
He's saying this is a day to come when they will be brought in again.
So that you see there is nothing here to teach because there is nothing anywhere else in the scripture and it is impossible that a man can be saved and lost and saved and lost and in and out.
Now there's only one reason why people ever teach anything like that and that is that they forget the doctrine of regeneration.
They put so much emphasis on a man's decision
and then decides to receive Christ and to be a Christian, and he holds on for a while, then he falls into sin and he denies it all.
Then, after a while again, he's sorry and he comes back, and he says, I believe again, and they say he's back again.
He goes in and out of the kingdom.
You see, if you don't accept the doctrine of the final perseverance of the saints, you've got to say something like that.
So, here again is a verse.
The teach is very positively the final perseverance of the saints.
Let me put it like this.
That kind of teaching is not only wrong but impossible for this reason.
It is God who does the grafting.
It is God who produces regeneration.
And when God puts this life of his in the soul, it is put there and it remains
It is inconceivable that you can have this life and lose it and have it again.
There is no such teaching in the whole of the Scripture, and indeed it implies a failure on the part of God.
And there is no failure on the part of God.
It is God who is able to put anybody into this olive tree.
And when God does put anybody into this olive tree, he remains in this olive tree.
And there is nothing, therefore, the countenance
the doctrine of falling away from grace, or the possibility of being in and out of Christ, or of having Christ in you and Christ not in you, having a seed of divine life.
As John puts it, the seed abidance, the seed of remaineth, then grab it down.
That is why salvation in Christ is certain and sure and cannot fail.
It is God who is able to graph them
in again.
Very well, there's the statement of verse 23.
Let me just deal with 24, but it really is just the carrying on of this same point.
He starts with the word for indicative of death.
And here is his gift argument, as I told you, which supports the fourth argument and makes it still more obvious.
And it's just a statement to this
God has already done something, which inherently is more difficult than bringing in the Jews.
What's that?
That's bringing in the Gentiles.
If thou were cut out of the olive tree which is wild by nature and were grafted contrary to nature into the good olive tree, how much more shall these which be the natural branches be grafted into their own olive tree?
Oh, you see, that's
carrying on what he says in verse 23.
God has done, if we may say so, the most impossible thing of all, and that is the bringing in of the Gentiles.
This is something he says, which is contrary to nature.
Now, we've already referred to that.
It means two things.
It means even in the very illustration, the horticultural illustration that is using, it is unnatural in horticulture.
You don't put a bad graft onto a good stock.
You do the exact opposite.
You put the good graft onto a bad stock.
You remember how we illustrated that.
That is the familiar practice.
But here's something quite different is happening.
A bad graft is put into the good stock and it begins to receive of the root and fatness of the good stock.
That's one meaning then a contrary to nature.
Buckets got a second meaning, this contrary to nature, which means this, the Gentiles were entirely outside the covenant of God.
They didn't belong to God's people.
You remember what we are told about the Jews in chapter 9, verses 4 and 5, 5 and 6, no, 4 and 5, who are Israelites to who pertain if the adoption and the glory and the covenants and the giving of the law and the service of God and the
promises, who is not the fathers, and of whom is concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over the Lord God, blessed forever.
That's true of Jews.
It is not true of Gentiles.
They are unnatural.
They are outside.
They belong to a wild olive tree.
Without God, without hope, then, in the world, there are enemies and aliens.
Peter says, you were not a people.
You were nothing.
You were just a rebel.
You were completely hopeless.
Indeed, Paul has been saying this.
in the 10th chapter, in verses 19 and 20.
But I say, did not Israel know?
First Moses says, I will provoke you to jealousy by them that are no people.
And by a foolish nation, I will envy no people, foolish nation.
Well, now what he's saying is this, if God has been able to bring in people like that, who are so absolutely remoting every sense from the people of God, if he's been able to do that,
Well, how much easier is it for him to bring in Jew, who by nature belong to this tradition?
In other words, the case of the Jews far from being more difficult than any other is nothing like as difficult as the case of the Gentiles.
For the Jews, after all, can be described as the natural branches.
Now, we went into all this in dealing with verses 16 and 17, so I needn't repeat it.
You know, that external is well.
All these descendants of Abraham, in that external sense, they belonged to the olive tree.
They were the natural branches, the first branches, and the argument is simply this.
If God can bring in those who are completely outside, the wild olive tree and graft him,
Well, how much easier will it be to bring in those who, by nature as it were, belong to this olive tree?
How much easier ought it be for a Jew to become a Christian if you like them a Gentile?
It isn't so, of course, because its God who brings in birth as he's going to tell us in verse 32.
But looking at it generally and from the human side, but it appears to be much easier.
Oh, their teaching in the Old Testament was preparing them for this.
All the promises, all the ceremonial of the temple, the burnt offerings and sacrifices, even the furniture, everything was pointing to this deliverer, this messiah, until then he comes.
How easy it should have been.
The law was our schoolmaster to bring us the Christ, how natural that it should end in Christianity.
That's all he's saying.
So it's an argument from the greater to the lesser.
How much more?
If God can do it in the case of Gentiles, will never have belonged to the olive tree at all in any sense?
Well, how much easier will it be for God to bring those who, in an external and a natural sense, do and always have belonged to this olive tree that was started by God in Abram and the Patriarch?
Very well, we must leave it at that for tonight.
The apostle has brought us them up to that particular point.
No one must say that the Jews are entirely outside, finished, God has rejected them, or that it's impossible to bring them back because of their antagonism.
No, no, says Paul.
God can do it.
And he's given proof of the fact that he can do it by doing something still more impossible.
If God can save a gentile, how much more so can he save a Jew?
That's the point.
at which we have to leave it for this evening.
God willing, we'll go on to the great prophetic utterance of this 25 next Friday evening.
Let us pray.
O Lord, we come again unto thee, and we thank thee for these blessed words.
God is able.
O Lord, we know that none of us would be saved where it not for that, and we humbly thank thee, and acknowledge that we are thy workmanship.
created a new in Christ Jesus, while we were dead in trespasses and sins, though its quickness together with Christ.
Even while we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of His Son.
Oh God, we rejoiced before the thou art able.
Thou art able to save us, even us.
Thou art able to keep us.
and thou art able to bring us safely into thine eternal kingdom.
We thank thee that we rest, this night as ever our faith, in thee and in the power of thine might alone.
O God, receive our praise.
And now, may the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ in the love of God, in the fellowship and the communion of the Holy Spirit abide and continue with us
Now, this night, throughout the remainder of this hour, short and certain earthly life and pilgrimage, and until we are in the glory of our last day.
Amen.